# The-Medieval-Humors

The Project:

This project demonstrates how the medieval humors were used in medicine through the form of urine testing. The user simply presses the button, and the wheel spins to reveal the various colours accociated with urine in respect to humoral theory.

History of Medieval Urine Testing:

The urine flask, referred to as a matula, was a traditional symbol of medieval physicians. By examining the colour, texture, and taste of a urine sample, the physician could tell whether or not a patient’s humors were balanced. The classical humoral theory states that the body was composed of four humors: black bile (dry and cold), yellow bile (dry and hot), phlegm (moist and cold), and blood (moist and hot). Optimal health was representative of humoral equilibrium, whereas illness resulted from an imbalance. If one humor was out of balance, then the opposite was applied. Furthermore, health and treatment regimens were directly related to diet. For example, if one’s face was especially red, this would signify an increase in blood. To re-balance the level of blood with respect to the other humors, the physician could bleed the patient. If a patient lacked blood relative to the other humors, a diet of meat and eggs (hot and warm) foods would be prescribed. 
	The humors governed the entire body. Medieval and classical physicians believed the stomach was the location where food was “cooked” (i.e. digested) and turned into blood. The process of this “cooking” was reflective in one’s urine. Urine that was too dark, for instance, indicated that the food in the stomach was being overcooked. The stomach, as a result, would require a diet consisting of more “hot” foods to add heat and aid the digestion process. 
	The “urine wheel” portrayed 20 different colours of urine and acted as a guide for physicians to follow. If contents of the urine was lighter, and floated to the top of the flask, this would typically be associated with the state of one’s head. Heaver sediments that floated to the bottom would represent the state of the organs one’s lower body, such as the kidneys. The physician’s examination of urine was the best way to determine the state of one’s humoral balance and prescribe an appropriate regimen to regain an equilibrium.

The Process:

Originally we wanted to create a project that in some way encapsulated medieval history and allowed visitors to somehow change the state of the exhibit. Because the real past is inaccessible, it was important to create a simulation that somewhat transported the user. The method in which this was executed, changed as our project design developed. We had brainstormed ideas that involved medieval music, medicine and torture. We decided to go with the idea of showcasing medieval methods of torture.  

This idea had gone through a few drafts, involving different instruments of torture, and ways the user could immerse themselves by carrying out the torture on a "gummy person". For example, cranking a handle to stretch the "gummy person" on a piece of torture equipment called 'The Rack', and other instruments such as a brazing bull, wheel and spiked chair. We discussed the use of audio and vinyl as a part of the "dungeon" design. The user would be able to physically interact with the methods of torture.  In addition each user would be assigned a different card with a given crime, respective punishment, and chances of death. While discussing what parts to use and the 'execution' of our project (pun intended), the conversation turned to discussing plague masks and disease. It was at that point, during our excitement, that we decided to make our exhibit about disease. This is where the idea for the Urine Wheel originated. 

The concept for the Urine Wheel took many shapes. The first being we wanted the "wheel" to be in the shape of a man who's humors were out of balance. The humors would be in a series of valves that needed readjusting by the user in order to "balance" them out. This idea evolved into the analyzing of humor imbalances through urine testing. Although this idea changed, the man in our original idea can still be seen within our final design. The wheel began as a 2D design, but as we began working on it, we decided to make it into a 3D model. After making the prototype out of cardboard, the final design mainly consisted of foam, little bits and hard stock covered styrofoam. 

Some of the issues we encountered during development had to do with shape, size and configuration. The shape of the exhibit changed once we had decided to make it 3D with electronics turning the wheel, instead of the user moving it manually. The problem we had encountered with this was we had to figure out a way for the colors to move beneath the wheel. We realized that we were approaching it wrong, and with the help of Dr. Turkel, he pointed out that it was much simpler to have the top portion of the wheel move. Another issue we faced had to do with sizing. After creating a designs on Adobe Illustrator for vinyl to accent our hollow bottle (where the changing colours would be displayed) and the box detailing what each colour meant, the design for the box was too small. The bottle was exactly the right size, however, in order for the print to be large enough to read the box needed to be bigger. This was fixed by measuring out the extra external square cut out that surrounded the bottle, and creating a new rectangle that would better suit our exhibit. This also effected the size and shape of the colour wheel also created on Adobe Illustrator. The sketches, measurements, and design process can all be seen in our repository.
